Superchain Registry docs (#1125)
ethereum-optimism/docs: pages/superchain/blockspace-charter.mdx

---
title: Blockspace and Standard Rollup Charters
lang: en-US
description: Learn about Blockspace charters, the Standard Rollup charter, and the Superchain Registry.
---

# The Blockspace and Standard Rollup charters

> Blockspace Charters and Standard Rollup Charter provide the essential technical and governance framework for the Superchain ecosystem. These frameworks provide a secure and scalable foundation for all stakeholders. By adhering to these charters, chain operators and users can operate confidently within the Optimism Superchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blockspace Charters provide the essential technical and governance framework for the Superchain ecosystem. These frameworks provide a secure and scalable foundation for all stakeholders. By adhering to these charters, chain operators and users can operate confidently within the Superchain.
```

These documents establish standards to ensure security, transparency, and long-term sustainability. This guide offers an overview of each charter, explains how chains can achieve compliance to be considered Standard Chains, and how the charters tie into the Superchain Registry.

> This doc mostly covers the charters, but references the Superchain Registry as they are all deeply connected. Read more about the Superchain Registry [here](./superchain-registry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This doc mostly covers the charters, but references the Superchain Registry as they are all deeply connected. Read more about the Superchain Registry [here](/superchain/superchain-registry).
```

## Summary of charters

The components work in unison to form a cohesive governance and technical framework:

*   **Blockspace Charters:** A type of framework that establishes criteria, governing policies, and precommitments for blockspace in the Optimism ecosystem, ensuring security, uptime, and alignment with the [Law of Chains](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/main/Law%20of%20Chains.md).

> *   **Standard Rollup Charter:** Defines the technical and governance requirements for chains to achieve "Standard" status, ensuring consistency, high security, and operational reliability. Building on Blockspace Charters, this document sets specific technical and operational requirements for "Standard" status. It determines which chains can be added to the Superchain Registry by outlining both on-chain and off-chain validation processes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Standard Rollup Charter:** Defines the technical and governance requirements for chains to become a Standard Rollup, ensuring consistency, high security, and operational reliability. Building on Blockspace Charters, this document sets specific technical and operational requirements for joining the Superchain. It determines which chains can be added to the Superchain Registry by outlining both on-chain and off-chain validation processes.
```

> *   **Standard Rollup Charter:** Defines the technical and governance requirements for chains to achieve "Standard" status, ensuring consistency, high security, and operational reliability. Building on Blockspace Charters, this document sets specific technical and operational requirements for "Standard" status. It determines which chains can be added to the Superchain Registry by outlining both on-chain and off-chain validation processes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Standard Rollup Charter:** The Standard Rollup Charter is the first blockspace charter, defining the technical and governance requirements for our highest-security blockspace. By adhering to the Standard Rollup Charter, chains can achieve "Standard" status, ensuring consistency, high security, and operational reliability.
```

Note that non-standard chains can also be added to the Superchain Registry, just not as standard chains (so these non-standard chains will be set with `superchain_level=0`).

> *   **Superchain Registry:** The Superchain Registry is a human-readable index of chains which serves as the source of truth for who's in the Superchain and what modifications they've made. Acting as the chain validator, the registry confirms compliance with the Standard Rollup Charter. Chains listed here are officially recognized as "Standard," meeting all governance and technical benchmarks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*   **Superchain Registry:** The Superchain Registry is a human-readable index of chains which serves as the source of truth for who's in the Superchain ecosystem and the chain's configuration. Acting as the chain validator, the registry checks for compliance with the Standard Rollup Charter. Chains with their `superchain_level = 1` meet all the criteria to be classified as a Standard Rollup.
```

Reviewer 2: Good suggestions here from @sbvegan.

Additionally, a few things I'd nix:

* the phrase "human-readable". Many (most) people are not comfortable reading the Superchain Registry which is one reason we also have plans to roll out a different front end. 
* the phrase "acting as the chain validator". The term "validator" is overloaded in crypto, so this phrase may have implications that we don't intend.

Together, these components ensure a robust, scalable, and transparent ecosystem. Blockspace Charters provides the vision and principles, the Standard Rollup Charter translates these into concrete requirements, and the Superchain Registry certifies compliance.

## Blockspace Charters

Blockspace Charters outline the foundational framework for governing blockspace within the Optimism ecosystem. They are structured around three main components, detailed below:

> ### Criteria

Reviewer 2: We need to add more detail here on which criteria are set by governance and which are more subjective and open to interpretation from the foundation. See this issue for more detail: https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/platforms-team/issues/438 (section on the updates to configurability.md also apply here)

The technical parameters defining which chains are subject to the charter include:

*   **Version:** The OP Stack version powering the chain, validated via commit-hash or release tag.
*   **Configuration:** Parameter bounds for deployment, covering both static variables like Chain ID and dynamic variables such as sequencer roles or upgrade keys.

> *   **Solvency:** Verification that the chain's history is free from invalid withdrawals or outputs that could undercollateralize the bridge.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Solvency:** Verification that all state transitions in the chain's history are valid, and free from invalid withdrawals or outputs that could undercollateralize the bridge.
```

### Governing policies

These establish rules and procedures for stakeholder interactions and blockspace management. For example:

*   Expected behaviors for roles like sequencers and upgrade key holders.
*   Processes for identifying and resolving violations, such as governance votes for removing non-compliant actors.

> *   Alignment with the [Law of Chains](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/main/Law%20of%20Chains.md), ensuring protections like censorship resistance and security.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   Alignment with the [Law of Chains](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/main/Law%20of%20Chains.md), ensuring user protections like censorship resistance and security.
```

### Precommitments

Commitments outlining long-term governance stability and anticipated changes. Examples include:

*   Future updates to fee models or role separations.
*   Guidance for evolving technical parameters like gas limits and fee margins.

By defining these components, blockspace charters ensures secure, scalable, and governed blockspace while fostering trust and alignment within the ecosystem.

Read more about Blockspace Charters in the [governance post](https://gov.optimism.io/t/season-6-introducing-blockspace-charters-superchain-first-governance/8133).

## The Standard Rollup Charter

> The Standard Rollup Charter is a specific blockspace charter, which are a type of framework defining high-level principles, criteria, and governance policies for managing blockspace. The Standard Rollup Charter defines these into actionable requirements for achieving "Standard" status. It ensures that chains adhere to the technical and operational benchmarks necessary to maintain security, compatibility, and compliance with the overarching ecosystem governance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Standard Rollup Charter is the blockspace charter that defines the requirements for being a standard chain, our highest-security flagship blockspace. The Standard Rollup Charter ensures that chains adhere to the technical and operational benchmarks necessary to maintain the highest standards of security, compatibility, and compliance in the Superchain.
```

The Standard Rollup Charter defines the criteria for chains aspiring to achieve "Standard" status. These criteria ensure compatibility, security, and operational consistency. Key elements include:

> *   **Security and integrity:** Chains must implement robust security measures to protect against attacks and ensure operational stability. Deterministic configurations and rigorous validations are key components.

Reviewer 2: IMO we can scrap these bullet points with the summary and jump straight to the specific criteria. We already explain in previous sections that the standard charter aims to maintain high security, uptime and accessibility requirements.

*   **Uptime and accessibility:** Chains are required to meet stringent uptime and liveness criteria, guaranteeing uninterrupted access. For instance, periodic performance checks and reliable failure recovery systems are mandated.

Learn more about The Standard Charter in [the governance post](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#standard-rollup-charter).

Here are some specific criteria a chain must meet:

> ### On-chain criteria

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Onchain criteria
```

> *   **Version validation:** Chains must deploy a governance-approved OP Stack release. Contracts must match the [standard bytecode](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/validation/standard/standard-versions-mainnet.toml).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Version validation:** Chains must deploy a governance-approved, up-to-date OP Stack release. Contracts must match the [standard bytecode](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/validation/standard/standard-versions-mainnet.toml).
```

*   **Configuration checks:** Chain parameters, such as block time and gas metering, must comply with governance-approved specifications. Administrative roles must align with Security Council requirements.

> Read more about On-Chain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#onchain-criteria)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Read more about onchain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#onchain-criteria)
```

### Off-chain criteria

The Optimism Foundation performs off-chain checks to verify compliance. These include:

*   Ensuring unique Chain IDs.
*   Monitoring security configurations.
*   Verifying governance authenticity.

Such measures remain under the Foundation's oversight until governance transitions to fully autonomous control.

Read more about Off-Chain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#offchain-criteria)

### History integrity

> The history integrity check identifies discrepancies in chain history. While this process is expected to be phased out, it ensures chains meet the Law of Chains criteria during their transition to "Standard" status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The history integrity check identifies discrepancies in chain history, including invalid state transitions. These checks are only required for chains that have not been managed by the Optimism Security Council initially. 
```

### Understanding chain compliance

Chains must meet strict requirements to qualify as "Standard." Below are answers to common questions:

*   **Can I modify system smart contracts and remain Standard?** No, modifications invalidate compliance.

> *   **Is a custom gas token chain Standard?** No, chains must use standard gas configurations.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Is a custom gas token chain Standard?** No, standard chains must use ethereum as their gas token.
```

*   **Is an alt-DA mode chain Standard?** No, Standard Rollups must adhere to the default data availability model.

> *   **Will beta features qualify as Standard?** Not initially. Features require governance approval and testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*   **Will beta features qualify as Standard?** No. Beta features have not yet been approved by Optimism Governance. When features graduate from Beta to GA, they may be included in the standard rollup charter. 
```

## The Superchain Registry

> The Superchain Registry serves as the authoritative compliance tool. It:

Reviewer 2: We should clarify here that the SRC has two important jobs:

1. It's a source of truth for everyone in the Superchain Ecosystem 
2. It can verify whether chains adhere to the Standard Rollup Charter. 

Because it can do (2), it can display a chain's standard status as part of (1).

*   **Validates version and configuration:** Ensures chains align with governance-approved standards in the form the The Standard Charter.
*   **Indicates promotion:** Certifies chains meet the standard criteria and promotes them to "Standard".

> By integrating with the Standard Rollup Charter, the registry offers an automated and transparent validation system. This ensures chains can independently demonstrate compliance. For additional details, refer to the [Superchain Registry documentation](./superchain-registry).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By integrating with the Standard Rollup Charter, the registry offers an automated and transparent validation system. This ensures chains can independently demonstrate compliance. For additional details, refer to the [Superchain Registry documentation](/superchain/superchain-registry).
```

---
title: Blockspace and Standard Rollup Charters
lang: en-US

> description: Learn about Blockspace charters, the Standard Rollup charter, and the Superchain Registry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Learn about Blockspace Charters, the Standard Rollup Charter, and the Superchain Registry.
```

I suspect we should either keep these concepts fully capitalized or fully lowercase -- either one is fine with me. But we shouldn't mix the casing.

## The Standard Rollup Charter

The Standard Rollup Charter is the blockspace charter that defines the requirements for being a standard chain, our highest-security flagship blockspace. The Standard Rollup Charter ensures that chains adhere to the technical and operational benchmarks necessary to maintain the highest standards of security, compatibility, and compliance in the Superchain.

Learn more about The Standard Charter in [the governance post](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#standard-rollup-charter).

Here are some specific criteria a chain must meet:

### Onchain criteria

*   **Version validation:** Chains must deploy a governance-approved, up-to-date OP Stack release. Contracts must match the [standard bytecode](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/superchain-registry/blob/main/validation/standard/standard-versions-mainnet.toml).
*   **Configuration checks:** Chain parameters, such as block time and gas metering, must comply with governance-approved specifications. Administrative roles must align with Security Council requirements.

> Read more about onchain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#onchain-criteria) and about configurations required by the Blockspace Charter in the three TOML files above and the Optimism Foundation [here.](https://specs.optimism.io/protocol/configurability.html)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read more about onchain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#onchain-criteria).
```

Reviewer: I think its okay to remove this because its referenced in the first link on this page

### Off-chain criteria

The Optimism Foundation performs off-chain checks to verify compliance. These include:

*   Ensuring unique Chain IDs.
*   Monitoring security configurations.
*   Verifying governance authenticity.

Such measures remain under the Foundation's oversight until governance transitions to fully autonomous control.

Read more about Off-Chain checks in the [repo](https://github.com/ethereum-optimism/OPerating-manual/blob/feat/standard-rollup-charter/Standard%20Rollup%20Charter.md#offchain-criteria)

### History integrity

> The history integrity check identifies discrepancies in chain history, including invalid state transitions. These checks are only required for chains that have not been managed by the Optimism Security Council initially.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The history integrity check identifies discrepancies in chain history, including invalid state transitions. These checks are only required for chains that have not been managed by the Optimism Security Council from launch.
```

The original wording may have been my suggestion, but now that I'm rereading with fresh eyes, I think "from launch" is clearer than "initially".
